

In addition to finding the individual phase of an oscillating signal, determination of phase shift, or lag-time, between two related signals is an important physiological parameter that may offer insight into pathophysiological conditions.  



The oscillations of blood pressure and heart rate are often compared using cross-spectral analyses to quantify baroreflex function.  With this method, the coherence, transfer function gain, and phase relationship between the two signals are quantified.  The phase shift between blood pressure and heart rate is lengthened in some pathophysiological conditions (Javorka et al, 2011) and more variable/unstable in other conditions (Halamek et al, 2003 Circulation; Stewart et al., 2000).  Therefore, the phase relationship between these two signals might be an important outcome measure for cardiovascular testing.  


Sometimes it can be more tangible to report absolute time lag (in time units), which depends on the frequency of oscillations and relative phase shift (in degrees). 



Wichterle et al. 2000 Cross-Spectral Analysis of Heart Rate and Blood Pressure Modulations


Phase delay in DM: Baroreﬂex analysis in diabetes mellitus: linear and nonlinear approaches
Michal Javorka • Zuzana Lazarova • Ingrid Tonhajzerova • Zuzana Turianikova • Natasa Honzikova • Bohumil Fiser • Kamil Javorka • Mathias Baumert

Variability of Phase Shift Between Blood Pressure and Heart Rate Fluctuations
A Marker of Short-Term Circulation Control
Josef Halámek et al. 2003
Circulation
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/108/3/292.long#ref-3
“computed as a variability of phase to define stability of the blood pressure–heart rate interaction or defined as the baroreflex sensitivity to define the gain in heart rate response to blood pressure changes, are significantly different in patients at risk for sudden arrhythmic death. In young versus older healthy individuals, only baroreflex gain is different, with the variability of phase being similar in both groups. These measurements of short-term circulatory control might help in risk stratification for sudden cardiac death.”



Julian Steward, 2000, Pediatric Research (2000) 48, 218–226; doi:10.1203/00006450-200008000-00016
Autonomic Nervous System Dysfunction in Adolescents with Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Is Characterized by Attenuated Vagal Baroreflex and Potentiated Sympathetic Vasomotion
http://www.nature.com/pr/journal/v48/n2/full/pr2000180a.html#bib13